BITCOIN MAGAZINE’S MISSION
Bitcoin Magazine is the oldest and most established source of news, information and expert commentary on Bitcoin, its underlying blockchain technology and the industry that has been built up around it. Since 2012, Bitcoin Magazine has provided analysis, research, education and thought leadership at the intersection of finance and technology.

Bitcoin Magazine strives to present accurate, timely and relevant material to the Bitcoin and blockchain communities. We are passionate about Bitcoin and are keen to share news about the people, companies and technological developments that are changing our world. Whether our readers are new to the space or blockchain-savvy developers, investors or entrepreneurs, we aim to inform and enlighten them with quality stories that meet our stringent editorial and journalistic standards, featuring both the highs and the lows of the Bitcoin industry.

WHO OWNS BITCOIN MAGAZINE?
Bitcoin Magazine is owned by BTC Media LLC, which is the media and publishing subsidiary of BTC Inc.

WHO FOUNDED BITCOIN MAGAZINE?
Bitcoin Magazine is the first publication devoted exclusively to Bitcoin. Founders Mihai Alisie and Vitalik Buterin, the creator of Ethereum, published their first issue in May 2012 and later joined forces with Orlando, Florida-based Coin Publishing LLC to produce 22 issues. BTC Media acquired Bitcoin Magazine in late 2014.

EDITORIAL POLICY
HOW DOES BITCOIN MAGAZINE CHOOSE WHICH STORIES TO COVER AND PUBLISH?
The editorial staff accepts stories and story pitches entirely on their journalistic merits, timeliness, capacity for coverage and specific relevance to the publication’s readership in the Bitcoin space.

DOES BITCOIN MAGAZINE PAY ITS WRITERS?
Yes, Bitcoin Magazine pays some of its authors and freelancers for content that is published on the site. Writers are expressly forbidden, however, to accept any form of payment or compensation from a third party in exchange for covering a story.

HOW CAN I PITCH A STORY OR GUEST POST TO BITCOIN MAGAZINE?
For news tips, timely stories or corrections, email editor@bitcoinmagazine.com with a clear, direct subject line on what type of content you’re submitting so that it does not get overlooked.

DOES BITCOIN MAGAZINE PUBLISH PRESS RELEASES?
Bitcoin Magazine does not publish press releases, but you are welcome to submit press releases to our editorial staff for consideration to include in stories.

Whether or not we decide to follow up with a press release submission is based entirely on the merit of the story and its relevance to our readership.

We do not accept news story pitches in exchange for payment, nor do we permit our writers to accept any third-party incentives to cover stories.

Press releases can be sent to editor@bitcoinmagazine.com for consideration.

DOES BITCOIN MAGAZINE ACCEPT PAYMENT FOR ARTICLES?
No, Bitcoin Magazine does not publish any editorial/news content in exchange for payment, nor do we permit our writers to accept any third-party incentives to cover stories.

DOES BITCOIN MAGAZINE OFFER ADVERTISING?
Yes, Bitcoin Magazine offers opportunities to advertise on our site through banner advertisements, email newsletter sponsorships and sponsored promotional content. Advertising and paid content is always clearly labeled and designated.

To request advertising and sponsorship availability or rates, please email us at sales@bitcoinmagazine.com.

DO BITCOIN MAGAZINE STAFF MEMBERS AND WRITERS OWN DIGITAL CURRENCIES?
Bitcoin Magazine staff and writers are often paid in cryptocurrencies, and as Bitcoin enthusiasts, many hold varying amounts of bitcoin and other currencies.

Disclosure Policy: In order to avoid the perception of any conflict of interest, Bitcoin Magazine makes every effort to disclose the following information in articles that include content pertaining to:

An investor in BTC Inc, BTC Media LLC, or Bitcoin Magazine;
a company in which BTC Inc has an ownership stake;
a company that the author has any financial relationship with (particularly in the case of a guest post);
a cryptocurrency other than bitcoin or any other investment or asset in which the author is significantly invested.
For more information, please review our Code of Ethics.


